["Toreador song -
Aria of the hot spring manners" playing]
Aria of the hot spring manners" continues]
[music ends]
[squawking]
[gentle harp music]
[horse trotting]
[Lucius]
It's been years since I left home.
I'm sure Livia's wrath will make
the furies themselves look tranquil.
A full day's ride
and no sign of the lodge yet.
Surely I must be close, right?
There it is.
[wind howling softly]
-[groans]
-[muscle strains]
Seems as though my back still
hasn't fully recovered from yesterday.
Nothing a bath can fix.
Let's just hope the amenities here
are up to par.
[groans]
[grunts, coughs]
[sighs]
Hello? Anyone!
-[tense mid-tempo music]
-[grunts]
What?
I'd like a room.
[man] Fine. There's your key.
We're gonna need your payment upfront,
so hand it over.
[Lucius] What flagrant disrespect!
Well, it's only one night I suppose.
[sighs]
I should find something to eat
before I bathe.
Here.
[sighs]
Oh, gods!
What horror!
It's like eating hot sewage!
But if I must…
[retches]
[gasping]
Relaxation is far too much to ask here.
I shall bathe and go straight to bed.
[yawning loudly]
[wind howling through holes]
Even the building itself
has been woefully neglected.
This is not a befitting backdrop
for a bath,
it's a blasted bastardization.
But I suppose I can endure it
as long as the water is…
Lukewarm! What villainy is this!
Everything about this place
is reprehensible.
There are no competing inns in the area,
so they've let the bar for service here
fall into the bowels of the underworld.
Well, fye on them!
I shall heat this water myself…
[groaning]
-[tense music]
-[shouting]
[man] One, two, one, two!
[upbeat mid-tempo music]
[inaudible dialogue]
[gasping]
[surprised gasps]
Wait a moment.
Something is different this time.
[man] There was a Westerner
under the water.
Oh my, this inn has no shortage
of luxuries, does it?
[gasps softly]
[screams]
[panting]
[humming]
[woman] He must have come
from one of those gaudy ships
that docked here last year.
What was everyone calling them?
They call them Black Ships.
And apparently, Westerners
have been popping up all over Edo
since they first arrived.
And now they've even invaded
our otago inn.
[sighs]
Are these stables?
[giggling]
Could this be
some sort of traveler's bath where one
can hang one's toga after a long journey?
[sneezes]
Excuse me, sir.
You look cold. Where are your clothes?
Ah, you must have met with some bandits.
Well, can't say I'm surprised.
Western linens are quite rare.
One moment, please.
Hmm?
Here you are. It's bit worn out
but it'll do in a pinch.
Put it on. It's yours.
He's giving this fine piece of clothing
to me?
There, you look as good
as this good deed feels.
Like they say,
what goes around comes around.
Speaking of, you were robbed today, right?
Stay at my inn on me.
There's no telling
when I'll be sent back this time.
I must investigate while I still can.
In my haste, I didn't notice it at first
but there appears to be nothing dividing
the baths from the changing rooms here.
Based on the way they had bocked
at the sight of my bare buttocks,
I assumed that these flat faces
had their fair share of moral taboos.
And yet, when all is stripped away,
literally,
it appears they embrace some liberties
even more than we do back in Rome
where men bathing with women
would be unheard of.
But it doesn't look like
anything untoward is happening.
In fact, the bath culture here
is remarkably civil.
TAVERN
Hmm.
The baths and buildings here are less
advanced than the others I've discovered.
As I thought,
something is different this time.
It's her, the girl from the bath.
How troublesome.
Looks like it's broken again.
Aren't you that Western gentleman
from before?
Uh, sir.
[upbeat energetic music]
-Huh?
-[man] There you are.
You've been drawing the water
for quite awhile, is something wrong?
My apologies, sir.
But it seems the well has malfunctioned.
Of course it has.
[sighs]
It'd better find someone to repair it.
Actually,
our Western friend is down there now.
[gasps]
[in Roman] This was stuck in there.
Oh my, it's the old kimono I lost.
What goes around comes back around indeed.
I never would've known people
from overseas had such good manners.
-[stomach growls]
-Hmm?
Hmm.
[laughs] Don't you worry, son.
Dinner will be ready soon.
[chuckles]
[man] Oh, and get some fresh clothes
ready for our new friend, would you?
Of course, sir.
Please follow me.
[gentle shamisen music]
[woman] I've prepared a new yukata
especially for you, sir.
Please put it on right in here.
Here, let me help you.
You'll be much more comfortable like this.
Perfect. You look much more handsome
this way as well.
Ah.
When the garment is worn this way,
it envelopes the skin like a
gentle embrace from the softest of clouds.
I shall keep my back straight
for optimum drapery.
So then, shall we go
and get you something to eat over there?
Oh? Well, looks like we have ourselves
another unusual guest today.
True.
I didn't know fancy foreigners like you
stayed in cheap joints like this.
Why don't you have a seat
and wait for your food here, sir.
Is she telling me to sit on that cushion?
Just relax and enjoy your meal.
[grunts]
[gasps]
What on earth are these wooden twigs?
[Lucius] My gods, are these
awkward things tools for eating?
[grunting]
How do these flat faces
maneuver these tiny javelins
so dexterously with one hand?
You won't be able to pick anything up
like that, sir.
Allow me to demonstrate.
First, you should hold them like this
and pinch them together like this.
Then you pick up your food like so.
[Lucius] Such simple, elegant motions.
Go ahead. It's your turn to try.
[grunting]
[groaning] What?
Why can't I hold them the way she can?
-[gasps]
-Hold this one, then this.
[Lucius] She's so close.
-You must be very strong.
-[groans softly]
[clears throat]
[in Roman] Thank you.
[man] Oh, Miss.
Why don't you shimmy-sen over here
and play us more shamisen?
Oh. Yes, sir.
[gasps]
What a strangely captivating woman.
And this!
The simplicity of the dish
brings out the quality of the ingredients.
Why, it's bursting with flavor!
[traditional shamisen music]
The more delicious the food,
the more one drinks.
And the more one drinks,
the livelier the conversation becomes.
What a delightful cycle indeed.
Hmm?
[pensive flute music]
[Lucius] This artwork is beautiful!
Such fine, delicate lines
flowing into one another
like the Tigris into the Euphrates.
[man] Well now, I see we've got a visitor.
You know,
if you truly find it that interesting,
then you're more than welcome
to take it home with you as a souvenir.
He's offering his art to me?
Go ahead and have that, young man,
it's all yours.
Take it back to your country
and tell them about your time here.
[Lucius] What a kind gentleman!
Ah! One moment, I have a better idea.
[jazzy pensive music]
[sighs]
I am certain
that meeting you here was fate.
So please take this with you as well.
[in Roman] Thank you!
[woman] Mr. Westerner, there you are.
I've been looking all over for you.
The master says
he would like for you to come
and follow me to your room,
do you understand?
[Lucius] It seems like she's trying
to tell me something.
Oh dear.
-Just come with me, alright?
-[gasps]
[Lucius] Is this…
some sort of rest area?
I'll lay out your bedding for you at once.
[gentle laidback music]
[grunts]
There. All finished.
I see. This way, one can use the space
for work during the day
and for resting at night.
Whoever conceived of this economical use
of such a small space
is truly a genius.
Has he never seen a closet before?
I'm all finished, sir.
Enjoy your stay.
Please make yourself at home.
[gasps]
This building may be quite old
but it is clearly well cared for.
And the service here is beyond compare.
I somehow feel right at home here
after my long journey.
[sighs]
Truly, this place is…
the perfect inn… [sighs]
[grunts softly]
Did I fall asleep?
How did it get so cold so fast?
I should take a bath to warm up.
[gentle relaxing music]
[grunts, sighs]
The water is a bit hotter than usual
but I'm sure it'll be fine.
All my stress and fatigue
are melting away.
-[water lapping]
-Huh?
Huh?
[gasps]
Well, well, well,
if it isn't Mr. Westerner.
[giggles]
You know, you've got a great body.
Mind if I touch it for a little while?
[Lucius groaning softly]
[Lucius] Stay strong, Modestus.
Livia is waiting for you…
[chuckles]
[old woman] You there!
You mustn't touch a lady
when she's drunk, you fiend.
Thank you Juno for sending your servant
to save my marriage.
-[Lucius groans]
-[giggling softly]
[sensual string music]
[straining softly]
[giggling softly]
Looks like I was wrong. This bath is…
far too hot for me to handle…
[sighs]
We have found a bathhouse nearby,
your majesty.
If it would please you, would you like
to relax there after your travels?
Indeed I would.
[sighs]
I can feel this hot water
cleansing my entire body and soul.
[sighs loudly]
[gentle lyre music]
[Hadrian] Mmm. What simple dishes.
This is divine, my tongue is in rapture.
And the lyre…
A splendid melody, it soothes me.
So the bed is stored
within that narrow space in the daytime.
Such amazing brilliance.
[grunts]
I commend for your excellent inn.
I rested quite well here.
Thank you, Emperor Hadrian.
Be truthful,
were these ideas your own inventions?
No, your grace.
Well then, whose were they?
A few months ago,
a strange man came to stay at my inn,
calling himself a thermae architect.
-[energetic upbeat music]
-A thermae architect?
Yes, sire.
I didn't ask why
but he stayed for a long time
and renovated this place.
It was marvelous!
Just look at that painting
on the wall there.
It's an image of the very man
who did all of this, your excellency.
[Hadrian chuckles] Good work, Lucius.
[Kenjiro Tsuda]
Thermae Romae. The Hot Spring Tour.
Author Ms. Mari Yamazaki visited an inn
hidden inside the mountains…
called Hoshi Onsen, Choujukan.
Hello.
-Welcome.
-Hello.
-Thank you for coming.
-Please come in.
-Thank you.
Wow. It’s wonderful.
[Mari] How old is this building?
This building was built in 1875.
-I see.
-So it’s 145 years old.
This building has been
maintained until now.
We actually use these buildings
as rooms for the guests,
so the guests can
spend time while enjoying this atmosphere.
[Kenjiro Tsuda]
This calming atmosphere transcends time.
It makes you feel
as if you’ve slipped back in time.
AKIKO YOSANO’S ROOM
TANGIBLE CULTURAL PROPERTY
Let’s go inside.
It’s a spacious room.
-Yes, please step inside.
-The beams are amazing.
What is this room used for?
This is referred to as the main building.
It's the oldest room in Hoshi Onsen.
-It's 140 years old?
-Yes.
-This room has been here for 140 years?
I think it's a feat
for a wood-framed house
like this to last 140 years.
Yes.
What is this?
[guide] Ms. Akiko Yosano
came here in September of 1931,
and she wrote that poem
while she stayed here.
-She wrote this poem… in this room?
-Yes.
She stayed here for three nights.
-That long?
-Yes.
I think when
foreign tourists come, they'll be
very curious about this closet.
A door that slides sideways like this
is rare to them, and when you open it,
there’s a bed inside.
It’s a foldable bed.
This is one of the characteristics
of a traditional inn.
This is lovely too.
There's a balcony outside.
Both the doors and the balcony itself
look antique.
Yes, it's an old-fashioned balcony.
-This was also built in 1875?
-Yes.
That's amazing.
-[lively shamisen music]
-[Kenjiro Tsuda] Thermae memory.
Ms. Yamazaki sketched
a memorable moment from this trip.
[Mari] I was wondering what to draw,
but I personally think
these hot spring inns are important
because they transcend time
and preserve things
from the good old days.
When people come to places like this,
I want them to leave their phones behind,
and not watch any TV.
Instead, I want them to simply stand still
and feel their existence here.
[Kenjiro Tsuda]
Thermae Romae. The Hot Spring Tour.
What kind of adventure
awaits us next time?
Mr. Yamazaki's journey will continue.
[upbeat energetic music]